Once around Captain
Star in the southern hemisphere in the
constellation of Pictor, there is a
faint red star, magnitude 9, too faint
to see without binoculars or telescopes.
I've indicated the location of it on the
map here with this little red ellipse
and the big arrow.
So what's remarkable about this
particular rather faint ordinarylooking
star? Well, it was noted by Jacobus
Cornelius Captain, a Dutch astronomer in
the year
1898 when he was reviewing a series of
photographic plates from a survey and
comparing the photographic plates with a
star catalog that he had from a couple
of years different that the star was
missing and it had been there in one and
not in the other. And a colleague Robert
Inis also noted another star that had
done the same thing but the other way
round and it was about 15 arcse seconds
away. So they very
much immediately realized this was a
star that had
moved and at the time that made it a
record holder because in the time
between the catalog and the photographic
plates it had moved about eight arcsec
per year. There was just a few years
between the two. This was a record. It
was the highest proper motion of any
known star, more than the previous
record holder, which is called
Groombridge
1830, but eventually it was uh
superseded by Barnard Star in 1916. Now,
I've got a whole talk about Barnard Star
that's been very popular. You might want
to check that one out.
So the proper motion that is really
where the star is moving past us and it
changes its aspect against the
background of much more distant stars.
Those stars are moving but they're so
far away that their position doesn't
seem to change very much. Whereas this
must be a nearby star in order to see
this high rate of change of its
position. And indeed they set about the
process of measuring the distance using
triangulation with the Earth's orbit as
a baseline, the so-called parallax
method, and showed that it was just
about 13 light years away,
12.83. Now, it's been determined since
that it's a halo star that's come in
from the outer reaches of the halo of
the Milky Way galaxy. And it's moving
past us at great speed. About 10,000
years ago, it would have been even
closer, just at seven light years, not
the 13. So, it's moving away from us
now, having gone past its closest
approach.
And in terms of the type of star, it's a
red dwarf, an M1 class red dwarf star.
Temperature, red hot,
3,550 Kelvin. About a third of the mass
of the sun, 28% and about a third of the
radius,
30%. And that gives it a very low power
output. At that low temperature, the
energy from each square meter is much
less. And there are very much fewer
square meters of surface area as well.
And so the total luminosity is just over
1% of that of our sun. These red dwarfs
are very very dim
indeed. But they last a very long time.
This one's about 11 billion years old.
So nearly as old as the universe, nearly
as old as the Milky Way galaxy. That's
about 13.
But this one is likely to live a 100 or
even 200 billion years. And that's
because these red dwarfs are fully
stirred. The convection within them
brings all the hydrogen within the star
into the core at some point and allows
it to consume the whole lot. And that
doesn't happen in larger stars like the
sun. the core can become depleted of
hydrogen whilst there is still vast
amounts of it in the outer layers that
just can't get to the
core. So, very interesting little red
dwarf star. But its path around the
galaxy is what marks it out. It's going
the wrong way. It's in a retrograde
orbit contrary to the rotation direction
of most of the other stars. Um, and
that's rather unusual and probably not
good for it in the long
run. Now, in addition to moving the
wrong way, it's also got a very high
radial velocity outwards. So, it's
crossing the path of the uh a lot of the
stars. Hence, what I say that it's prone
to maybe having a collision at some
point in the future. There are a lot of
gaps though. So collisions of stars are
fairly rare, but they do
happen. And it's not alone. It's moving
with a group of stars, the captain
moving group. And they are all going the
same way around the galaxy. And there's
a chart really of the speed versus uh
the speed in another direction showing
this group in red triangles. Compare
that with some ordinary stars in the uh
wider spread little green dots. The rest
of the halo stars all over the place in
white and the Omega Centuri group in
blue. Now we mention Omega Centuri
because this is a very very large
cluster of stars classed originally as a
globular cluster but it's much too big
really. Most globular clusters have a
few hundred,000 stars. This one has 10
million and weighs in at 4 million solar
masses. So, this is the core of a dwarf
galaxy. And that's really confirmed by
the fact that not all the stars have the
same age. It shows several bursts of
star formation. And globular clusters,
the smaller ones, really only have one
age of stars within them. So, this is
slightly different.
It's even got a 40,000 solar mass black
hole in the center. Now, galaxies and
indeed globular clusters seem to have a
rule of thumb relationship that the
black hole in the center weighs 1% a.1%
1,000th of the total mass of the
containing galaxy or cluster. And it's a
an approximate rule. It's not exact. And
here it's quite a long way out because
40,000 out of 4 million is one part in a
100. So the solar the mass of the
central black hole is 10 times larger
than would fit that
rule. But of course the mass of the
globular cluster is not the mass of the
original dwarf galaxy. There would have
been a lot of other material in the disc
and the outer structures of the galaxy.
What we're measuring here at 4 million
is just the core. And so the other
probably 90% of the the dwarf galaxy has
been stripped away. And so this would
have been a fairly sizable object with
perhaps 10 times as many. So maybe 100
million stars. Um that's quite a big
dwarf galaxy.
Now, there's been a report in 2014 that
the star captain has two planets B and
C. So, the announcement was made and the
measurements that came from it were that
planet B was 4.8 times the mass of the
Earth in a tight orbit 0.17. So 17% of
an astronomical unit, the Earth's sun
distance taking just 48 days to go
round. And that puts it in the habitable
zone. That distance from this much less
powerful star means you have to be
fairly close in order to get enough heat
to bring your temperature up to the
habitable range where liquid water could
exist. So planet B was in that position.
Planet C slightly larger at seven Earth
masses, orbiting at twice the
distance, 31 of an astronomical unit,
and in a period of 121 12 days further
out and much colder. And interestingly,
these are in a 5:2 ratio. So for every
five laps, five lots of 48.62 62 days
that you do the outer planet C does two
lots of its 121 12 day orbit and that's
just like Jupiter and Saturn in our
solar system. Jupiter will do five laps
for every two laps that Saturn does. So
this seemed entirely reasonable and very
plausible
and it got people very excited because
the B planet Captain
B being as the star is 11 billion years
old, nearly as old as the Milky
Way, the planet is likely that old as
well. And so if you have a habitable
zone
planet that might be inhabited by a
civilization and it's so
old. Well, it's taken life on Earth
about 4 billion years to produce the
intelligent creatures that are listening
to this video.
But with 11 billion years of history,
there's a whole lot more time for such a
civilization to evolve and to massively
exceed the capabilities of mankind. So
this got the uh hypothesis about super
intelligent aliens really
going. But the twist in the tail is
unfortunately that it's not there. In
2015, a paper showed that the star was
rotating on its axis and in a period
that was onethird of the orbit of the
uh sorry, the orbit is onethird of the
rotation period of the star. Get that
the right way round. And so what we were
probably seeing was an artifact of star
spots rotating around the star creating
the illusion of planet B. And that was
followed up in 2015 when in fact we were
able to determine that both planets were
due to this problem. So I'm afraid
they're not there. That doesn't mean
there aren't planets. It just means
those particular ones aren't there. And
perhaps we need to look for smaller
ones, um, more Earthlike, Earth-sized,
Earth mass planets around Captain Star.
So, I hope you've enjoyed that little
trip once around Captain Star. this
little red dwarf that is whizzing past
our stellar neighborhood and perhaps was
ejected as part of the galactic merger
where the Omega Centuri cluster was part
of the core of a dwarf galaxy that
merged with the Milky Way and ejected
its outer layers, including Captain
Star. Thanks very much for listening.